README.md, before:

# PlasEval

PlasEval is a tool aimed at evaluating the accuracy and at comparing methods for the problem of **plasmid binning**.

## Plasmid binning

Plasmid binning aims at detecting, from the draft assembly of a single isolate bacterial pathogen, groups of contigs assumed eachto originate from a plasmid present in the sequenced isolate. Recent methods for plasmid binning include <a href="https://github.com/cchauve/PlasBin-flow">PlasBin-Flow</a>, <a href="https://github.com/phac-nml/mob-suite">MOB-recon</a> and <a href="https://gitlab.com/sirarredondo/gplas">gplas</a>.

The result of applying a plasmid binning method to a draft assembly is a set of unordered groups of contigs, called **plasmid bins**.

## Plasmid binning evaluation and comparison

### Evaluation
In the **evaluation** mode of PlasEval, given a set of *predicted plasmid bins* resulting from a plasmid binning tools and a *ground truth* set of plasmid bins, where each true plasmid bin contains all the contigs that belong to one of the plasmid present in the sequenced isolate, PlasEval computes three statistics, the *precision*, the *recall* and the *F1-score* of the predicted plasmid bins with respect to the ground truth.

For a group $`X`$ of contigs, we denote by $`L(X)`$ the cumulated length of the contigs in $`X`$. 
For a predicted plasmid bin $`P`$ and a ground truth plasmid bin $`T`$, we define the *overlap* between $`P`$ and $`T`$, denoted by $`o(P,T)`$, as the cumulated length of the contigs presents in both $`P`$ and $`T`$.
Given a set $`A`$ of predicted plasmid bins and a set $`B`$ of ground truth plasmid bins, we define the precision $`p(A,B)`$ and recall $`r(A,B)`$ as follows:
```math
p(A,B) = \frac{\sum\limits_{P\in A} \max\limits_{T\in B} o(P,T)}{\sum\limits_{P\in A}L(P)}, r(A,B) = \frac{\sum\limits_{T\in B} \max\limits_{P\in A} o(P,T)}{\sum\limits_{T\in B}L(T)}.
```  

The F1-score is the arithmetic mean of the precision and recall
```math
F_1(A,B) = 2\frac{{p}(A,B){r}(A,B)}{{p}(A,B)+{r}(A,B)}.
```  

### Comparison
In the **comparison** mode of PlasEval, given two sets of *predicted plasmid bins* (either resulting from two plasmid binning tools or from a plasmid binning tool and a ground truth), PlasEval computes three statistics, PlasEval computes a *dissimilarity measure* that indictaes how much both sets of predicted plasmid bins are in agreement. 
The full details of the dissimilarity measure computed by PlasEval are available in the preprint <a href="">PlasEval: a framework for comparing and evaluating plasmid binning tools</a> and we describe below its general principle.
The dissimilariy value is the sum of 4 terms accounting respectively for
- *extra contigs*: the contigs present in $`A`$ but not in $`B`$;
- *missing contigs*: the contigs present in $`B`$ but not in $`A`$;
- *splits*: splitting of the plasmid bins of $`A`$ to obtain a set of intermediate bins defined as the intersection of $`A`$ and $`B`$;
- *joins*: joining the splitted plasmid bins into the plasmid bins of $`B`$.

Each of these components incur a *cost*, parameterized by a parameter $`\alpha \in [0,1]`$:
- each extra or missing contig $`c`$ results in a cost $`\ell(c)^\alpha`$, where $`\ell(c)`$ is the length of $`c`$;
- each split of a plasmid bin $`P`$ into two smaller bins $`P',P''`$ results in a cost $`\min(L(P')^\alpha,L(P'')^\alpha)`$;
- each join of two intermediate plasmid bins $`P',P''`$ into  larger bin $`P`$ results in a cost $`\min(L(P')^\alpha,L(P'')^\alpha)`$.
 
So with $`\alpha=0`$, the length of contigs is not accounted for and only set-theoretic operations define the dissimilarity value, while with $`\alpha=1`$ it is fully accounted for.
By default $`\alpha=0.5`$.

In the case where some contigs are *repeated*, i.e. a contig appears in more than one plasmid bin of $`A`$ and/or $`B`$, a *branch-and-bound* algorithm computes the pairing between repeats contigs in $`A`$ and in $`B`$ that results in the minimum dissimilarity value.

Finally the dissimilarity obtained as described above is *normalized* into a value in $`[0,1]`$ by dividing it by 
```math
\sum\limits_{P\in A}\sum\limits_{c\in P} \ell(c)^{\alpha} + \sum\limits_{Q\in B}\sum\limits_{c\in Q} \ell(c)^{\alpha}.
```
  
## Usage

### Input: plasmid bins file

The main input in both modes ofPlasEval are the two plasmid bins files. 
A plasmid bins file is a TSV file that describes a set of plasmids bins in a forma where each row contains three pieces of information: the identifier of a plasmid bin, the identifier of a contig that belongs to this plasmid bin and the length of the contig.
The file should have a header row with column names `plasmid`, `contig`, `contig_len`. 
An example is provided below that describes the set of plasmid bins where bin `P1` contains contigs `C1,C2` and bin `P2` contains contigs `C1`, `C3` and `C4`.
```
plasmid	contig 	contig_len
P1	C1 	2000
P2	C3 	3000
P1	C2 	2000
P2	C1	2000
P2	C4	2000
```

If a contig appears in several copies in a plasmid bin, only one copy is accounted for.
Other information can be included in the TSV file, but will not be accounted for by PlasEval.

### Input: numeric parameters

In both evaluation and comparison mode, PlasEval takes an extra optional parameter `len_threshold`: every contig of length below the value `len_threshold` is discarded from both sets of considered plasmid bins. This parameter is useful in comparison mode in the case of plasmid bins sets that contain many short repeated contigs, which can result in the branch-and-bound algorithm taking a long time to complete.

In comparison mode, the value of $\alpha$ can be set, although by default it takes value $0.5$.

#### Usage
```
python eval/evaluate_bins.py --pred PREDICTED_BINS_TSV --gt GROUNDTRUTH_BINS_TSV --out OUT_DIR --res OUT_FILE --thlen LEN_THRESHOLD
```
where `pred` and `gt` are TSV files, with the set of predicted and ground truth plasmid bins respecitvely. `out` is the path to the output directory while `res` is the name of the output file. `thlen` is the integer length threshold as mentioned above.

3. Compare mode: <br/>
In addition to the two plasmid bin files, the compare mode requires the path to output file and log file as input.

#### Usage
```
python compare/plasmid_comparison_main.py --l LEFT_BINS_TSV --r RIGHT_BINS_TSV --out_file OUT_FILE --log_file LOG_FILE
```
where `l` and `r` are TSV files, each with one set of plasmid bins. `out_file` is the path to the output file while `log_file` is the path to the log file.

### Output
1. The output file for the evaluate mode contains the following information:<br/>
	a. Number and names of predicted plasmid bins <br/>
	b. Precision details: For each predicted bin, for both contig level and basepair level precision, the name of the best matched ground truth bin and the corresponding precision values <br/> 
	c. Recall details: For each ground truth bin, for both contig level and basepair level recall, the name of the best matched predicted plasmid bin and the corresponding recall values <br/> 
	d. Overall contig level and basepair level statistics

2. The output file for the compare mode contains the following information:<br/>
	a. Cumulative length of contigs present in at least one of set of plasmid bins,<br/>
	b. Cost of cuts: splitting bins from first set of plasmid bins,<br/>
	c. Cost of joins: splitting bins from second set of plasmid bins,<br/>
	d. Cumulative length of contigs present only in the first set,<br/>
	e. Cumulative length of contigs present only in the second set,<br/>
	f. Dissimilarity score

Commit message:

Added plaseval.py, modified README

README.md, after:

# PlasEval

PlasEval is a tool aimed at evaluating the accuracy and at comparing methods for the problem of **plasmid binning**.

## Plasmid binning

Plasmid binning aims at detecting, from the draft assembly of a single isolate bacterial pathogen, groups of contigs assumed eachto originate from a plasmid present in the sequenced isolate. Recent methods for plasmid binning include <a href="https://github.com/cchauve/PlasBin-flow">PlasBin-Flow</a>, <a href="https://github.com/phac-nml/mob-suite">MOB-recon</a> and <a href="https://gitlab.com/sirarredondo/gplas">gplas</a>.

The result of applying a plasmid binning method to a draft assembly is a set of unordered groups of contigs, called **plasmid bins**.

## Plasmid binning evaluation and comparison

### Evaluation
In the **evaluation** mode of PlasEval, given a set of *predicted plasmid bins* resulting from a plasmid binning tools and a *ground truth* set of plasmid bins, where each true plasmid bin contains all the contigs that belong to one of the plasmid present in the sequenced isolate, PlasEval computes three statistics, the *precision*, the *recall* and the *F1-score* of the predicted plasmid bins with respect to the ground truth.

For a group $`X`$ of contigs, we denote by $`L(X)`$ the cumulated length of the contigs in $`X`$. 
For a predicted plasmid bin $`P`$ and a ground truth plasmid bin $`T`$, we define the *overlap* between $`P`$ and $`T`$, denoted by $`o(P,T)`$, as the cumulated length of the contigs presents in both $`P`$ and $`T`$.
Given a set $`A`$ of predicted plasmid bins and a set $`B`$ of ground truth plasmid bins, we define the precision $`p(A,B)`$ and recall $`r(A,B)`$ as follows:
```math
p(A,B) = \frac{\sum\limits_{P\in A} \max\limits_{T\in B} o(P,T)}{\sum\limits_{P\in A}L(P)}, r(A,B) = \frac{\sum\limits_{T\in B} \max\limits_{P\in A} o(P,T)}{\sum\limits_{T\in B}L(T)}.
```  

The F1-score is the arithmetic mean of the precision and recall
```math
F_1(A,B) = 2\frac{{p}(A,B){r}(A,B)}{{p}(A,B)+{r}(A,B)}.
```  

### Comparison
In the **comparison** mode of PlasEval, given two sets of *predicted plasmid bins* (either resulting from two plasmid binning tools or from a plasmid binning tool and a ground truth), PlasEval computes three statistics, PlasEval computes a *dissimilarity measure* that indictaes how much both sets of predicted plasmid bins are in agreement. 
The full details of the dissimilarity measure computed by PlasEval are available in the preprint <a href="">PlasEval: a framework for comparing and evaluating plasmid binning tools</a> and we describe below its general principle.
The dissimilariy value is the sum of 4 terms accounting respectively for
- *extra contigs*: the contigs present in $`A`$ but not in $`B`$;
- *missing contigs*: the contigs present in $`B`$ but not in $`A`$;
- *splits*: splitting of the plasmid bins of $`A`$ to obtain a set of intermediate bins defined as the intersection of $`A`$ and $`B`$;
- *joins*: joining the splitted plasmid bins into the plasmid bins of $`B`$.

Each of these components incur a *cost*, parameterized by a parameter $`\alpha \in [0,1]`$:
- each extra or missing contig $`c`$ results in a cost $`\ell(c)^\alpha`$, where $`\ell(c)`$ is the length of $`c`$;
- each split of a plasmid bin $`P`$ into two smaller bins $`P',P''`$ results in a cost $`\min(L(P')^\alpha,L(P'')^\alpha)`$;
- each join of two intermediate plasmid bins $`P',P''`$ into  larger bin $`P`$ results in a cost $`\min(L(P')^\alpha,L(P'')^\alpha)`$.
 
So with $`\alpha=0`$, the length of contigs is not accounted for and only set-theoretic operations define the dissimilarity value, while with $`\alpha=1`$ it is fully accounted for.
By default $`\alpha=0.5`$.

In the case where some contigs are *repeated*, i.e. a contig appears in more than one plasmid bin of $`A`$ and/or $`B`$, a *branch-and-bound* algorithm computes the pairing between repeats contigs in $`A`$ and in $`B`$ that results in the minimum dissimilarity value.

Finally the dissimilarity obtained as described above is *normalized* into a value in $`[0,1]`$ by dividing it by 
```math
\sum\limits_{P\in A}\sum\limits_{c\in P} \ell(c)^{\alpha} + \sum\limits_{Q\in B}\sum\limits_{c\in Q} \ell(c)^{\alpha}.
```
  
## Usage

### Input: plasmid bins file

The main input in both modes of PlasEval are the two plasmid bins files. 
A plasmid bins file is a TSV file that describes a set of plasmids bins in a forma where each row contains three pieces of information: the identifier of a plasmid bin, the identifier of a contig that belongs to this plasmid bin and the length of the contig.
The file should have a header row with column names `plasmid`, `contig`, `contig_len`. 
An example is provided below that describes the set of plasmid bins where bin `P1` contains contigs `C1,C2` and bin `P2` contains contigs `C1`, `C3` and `C4`.
```
plasmid	contig 	contig_len
P1	C1 	2000
P2	C3 	3000
P1	C2 	2000
P2	C1	2000
P2	C4	2000
```

If a contig appears in several copies in a plasmid bin, the evaluation mode only accounts for one copy of the contig. The comparison mode can account for multiple copies of a contig in the same bin.

### Input: numeric parameters

In both evaluation and comparison mode, PlasEval takes an extra optional parameter `min_len`: every contig of length below the value `min_len` is discarded from both sets of considered plasmid bins. This parameter is useful in comparison mode in the case of plasmid bins sets that contain many short repeated contigs, which can result in the branch-and-bound algorithm taking a long time to complete.

The comparison mode uses two more parameters. Firstly, the value of $\alpha$ can be passed as a parameter, although by default it takes value $0.5$. Secondly, the maximum number of recursive calls used in the branch and bound can also be set by the user. If the number of recursion calls is exceeded, the comparison is stopped. In such instances, the comparison mode can be rerun with a higher length threshold. The default value for the maximum number of recursive calls is $10000000$.

#### Usage
1. The following command is used for the evaluation mode: 
```
python plaseval.py eval --pred PREDICTED_BINS_TSV --gt GROUNDTRUTH_BINS_TSV --out_file OUT_FILE (--min_len LEN_THRESHOLD)
```
where `pred` and `gt` are TSV files, with the set of predicted and ground truth plasmid bins respecitvely. `out_file` is the path to the output file. The integer length threshold `min_len` can be provided as an optional parameter.

2. In addition to the two plasmid bin files, the comparison mode also takes the path to the log file as input.
The following command is used for the comparison mode: 
```
python plaseval.py comp --l LEFT_BINS_TSV --r RIGHT_BINS_TSV --out_file OUT_FILE --log_file LOG_FILE (--min_len LEN_THRESHOLD --p ALPHA --max_calls MAX_RECURSIVE_CALLS)
```
where `l` and `r` are TSV files, each with one set of plasmid bins. `out_file` is the path to the output file while `log_file` is the path to the log file. The parameters `min_len`, `p` and `max_calls` are optional.

### Output
1. The output file for the evaluate mode contains the following information:<br/>
	a. Precision details: For each predicted bin, for both contig level and basepair level precision, the name of the best matched ground truth bin and the corresponding precision values <br/> 
	b. Recall details: For each ground truth bin, for both contig level and basepair level recall, the name of the best matched predicted plasmid bin and the corresponding recall values <br/> 
	c. Overall contig level and basepair level statistics

2. The output file for the compare mode contains the following information:<br/>
	a. Cumulative length of contigs present in at least one of set of plasmid bins,<br/>
	b. Cumulative cost of all contigs from (a),<br/>
	c. Cost of cuts: splitting bins from first set of plasmid bins,<br/>
	d. Cost of joins: splitting bins from second set of plasmid bins,<br/>
	e. Cumulative length of contigs present only in the first set,<br/>
	f. Cumulative length of contigs present only in the second set,<br/>
	g. Dissimilarity score
